I wouldn't even bring this up, but I read in a PW interview that you say, I don't mind if you mention race as a, quote, black mystery writer.
I mean...
Is it pertinent to you to be identified as such?
You said, I don't mind if you... No, it's not pertinent.
I mean, there's a lot of different things that I am, you know, and I don't mind talking about any of them, you know.
I'm a novelist.
I'm a mystery writer.
I'm a black mystery writer, you know.
I'm a lot of different things in soccer.
I don't care.
You know, I mean, it's not... You know, I mean, it's a big thing to easy, my character, that he's black and he's living among black people and...
And it would be a mistake not to recognize that.
And it's not, I mean, it's not like a trick or a vehicle or a hook that I'm using, you know, like, you know, you might have a mystery writer who's a French cook, you know.
We have mystery writers who are French cooks.
Yeah, right.
Well, you know, and like, or the detective is a French cook.
Okay, so like, you know, you want, that might not have much to do.
It might just be a trick that somebody's using, you know, just that little thing.
to give depth or some kind of quirk to their character.
But, I mean, easy being black is not done.
I mean, it's real.
I'm making, like, comments about things.
I take it very seriously.
And I don't mind.
I don't mind when people just talk to me about being, you know, just a novelist.
You write fiction.
But, yeah, because I'm very interested in fiction.
We will get to that.
But I think certainly being an African-American, African-American writer is one element, one level.
But the world that you write about
certainly involves people of color.
And you are certainly trying to profile it, I guess, if not explain that world, but certainly use it as your... Yeah, it's the world of my character.
It's the world of your character.
Yeah.
It's very hard to write fiction that doesn't have some kind of base like that in it.
Are you trying... The piece in today's times, for instance, congratulations, that's a nice... Yeah, it is nice.
I like that.
Yeah, that's nice.
The lead is, well, he really doesn't live in L.A.
anymore.
You live in New York.
Talk about this dichotomy, if you will, a bit for me.
L.A.
is certainly the city of your imagination, and it's the city of your youth.
But why not write about...
You know, New York, why L.A.?
Well, you know, my next novel is about half of it occurs in New York, which is not an easy book.
It's another kind of book.
I was going to say.
It could be by Easy Rawlins.
Easy Rawlins wouldn't be in New York.
I don't think he'll ever go to New York.
But Easy does, you know, he does live in, I mean, Easy lives in L.A., and that's what I write about.
I can write about any place.
I write about L.A.
You know, when I start writing, the first things I wrote were about the Deep South, because those are my first memories, even though I never lived there.
They're my first memories, because everybody I knew used to tell stories about, you know, Fifth Ward, Houston, Texas, and southern Louisiana, and plantations, and farms, and sharecropping, and music, and parties, and, you know, and on and on and on, that kind of life.
And the first book I wrote, Gone Fishing, was actually about that, which nobody published because it wasn't a mystery, and it was about young black men, and nobody really knew how to, like, commercialize it, or so they thought.
That remains an unpublished work?
It remains unpublished.
So it will be published, though it's just not yet.
Now, so, I mean, I don't...
I don't really see it as a dichotomy.
I live in New York because I like living in New York.
I love the West Village.
I think it's a great place.
People live, like I said in the article, you have all kinds of people right together.
It's a very rich texture of a city.
And unlike most American cities, people are not removed from it.
They don't live in the suburbs.
As a rule, they don't live in their cars.
In order to go anyplace, you have to go down and get in the street.
That's the only way to get places.
You know, either you take subways or taxis or buses or you walk, and that's the way you get around in New York.
And I love that.
I love New York.
Of course, it's easy up here.
Bostonians test New York for reasons that have no... Well, it's deep in the history.
It's dumb.
I mean, every time I go there, I love it more and more.
What a great place.
And also, as an adjunct to what you're saying, you go to a city like Detroit, Detroit is dying, it's dead because everything has moved out of the suburbs.
Everything's gone away, yeah.
And even those who come into work, I mean, it's gone.
And once they start putting the jobs out there, forget it.
You're leaving these poor people just to die in a dying town.
And that's so true.
And you know,
And this is true of most American cities.
I'm on tour now.
I'm going to all these cities.
I can't even remember.
I've been to some and it's hard to remember which is which.
But most cities downtown are just big buildings with kind of windows like this.
There's no businesses.
There's no real life in the city.
People aren't walking.
And there is no life after 5 or 6.
After 6.
People are gone.
And all the lunch stands are closed.
I don't like living like that.
I don't like driving particularly.
I do like Los Angeles a lot when I go there.
I like L.A.
I was just out two weeks ago.
I love L.A.
But, you know, it's not where I live, though.
You know, I live in New York, but I write about L.A.
I go to L.A.
all the time.
I know L.A.
very well, and, you know, it's in my heart.
So is New York, you know.
You said in that same interview, not the Times one, but the PW interview, that EZ accepts that there is no justice in the world.
Mm-hmm.
Is that your feeling?
Well, not that there's no justice in the world, but that it's not clear-cut.
Easy's world, and most people's world, it's just not clear-cut.
If you're going to get a fair shake, you have to kind of work with it.
You kind of have to work through it a little bit.
I do.
Easy did more.
My parents did more.
My parents' generation and their parents' generation.
did more things aren't exactly fair you can't exactly one of the things i explain i talk about mouse uh my uh my sociopathic character and i say people often ask me when i do readings they say well you know why is he why are you seeing my friends and i go well if you're in middle class and you live in a middle class neighborhood your friends are people that you go out with that maybe you share babysitting with the worst thing you do maybe you have to borrow a couple of bucks sometimes right uh and he
In Easy's world, Mouse, who's the hero of that world rather than Easy, really, if Easy comes running up to Mouse's house and says, they're after me, Mouse will reach, you know, right over somewhere and come out with his gun.
If you went to your middle-class friend's house, they would say, I'll call 911.
You say, you don't understand.
There's just half a block down there.
911 is not going to help.
But, you know, that's the different kind of life.
I think that that's a life that... Maybe the middle class guy is going to grab his gun now.
Well, things are actually changing, but still not that much.
Still, you know, if you live... People try to live in a place where they feel comfortable.
People are always bragging, you know, when they're living in a place where I don't have to lock the doors.
Wonderful.
You don't have to lock the doors where you live.
That's great.
I want to live in a place like that.
That's bullshit.
You've got to lock your door.
Well, there are people who don't, though.
But, you know, but you see, that's not how I...
That's not how easy lives.
That's not how a lot of people today live.
A lot of people today live under great pressure.
A lot of people of color and then poor whites in America, they live under a great deal of pressure.
They don't feel like they get a fair shake.
The bureaucracy doesn't give them a fair shake.
People who don't like them because they're black or because they're women or because they're poor don't give them a fair shake.
People have pre-assumptions about who you are and what you are and what you did.
There was a great story in Manhattan about 10 or 12 years ago.
A guy, you know, a black guy, jumps to the turnstops.
His name is like Joe Jackson.
Who knows?
I don't know what his name is, but let's say it's that.
Some guy named Joe Jackson had murdered somebody and been a drug dealer and done all these things and was on bail and jumped bail and didn't come in for sentencing because he'd been found guilty.
They said, well, you're him.
Yeah.
And he said, no, I'm not him.
Just take, you know, take my fingerprints.
I'm not him.
But, you know, he kind of looked like the guy.
You know, he maybe had a scar somewhat similar to his or something.
They never took his fingerprints.
He was in Rikers for six months.
Jesus Christ.
He was like, you know.
That's a real story?
That's a real story.
Yeah, this happened, I don't know, ten years ago.
It was in Manhattan.
And they forgot about him, sure.
Well, even his lawyer.
The only reason they found him, this really was very funny, I remember.
They probably found the real Joe Jackson.
No.
He was coming to the trial for sentencing.
You know, because, you know, it takes forever in New York.
He's like months in jail.
I'm sorry to laugh, but that's a funny story.
They take him up for sentencing.
And the prosecutor, because the defender was a different guy.
The prosecutor isn't the guy, right?
The prosecutor, who just happened to be the same guy who had been prosecuting, I guess, you know.
One of these courts.
You know what?
This isn't Joe Jackson.
They go, what are you talking about?
Yeah, this is Joe Jackson.
No, no, no.
I remember Joe Jackson.
He gave me a look.
I won't ever forget.
You know, whatever it was.
And they let him go.
And this is like... So he did six months for jumping a turnstile.
Right.
And damn nearer got sent off to Attica or something.
It could have been like in prison.
It could have been in the Attica riot.
He couldn't get the defense lawyer to believe him enough to go through the amount of work.
Because, you know, there's a great deal of work.
When you're in Riker's,
It's great real work to do anything.
HBO had that special on, right?
That was really very interesting.
The guy who was coming up for a trial, he had to go 32 times down to the court in order just to get them to say, no, you can't.
We're not going to let you out.
You know, so they didn't want to do that.
So when you talk about a fair shake, you know, I mean, if, again, if you live in that middle-class America, things like this don't seem possible.
They say, well, they could just take your finger and say, yeah, if they will.
So, well, they have to do that.
Well, no, they don't.
They don't have to do anything, you know?
Well, let's talk, you know, I'm amused, by the way.
The people who write some of these stories must be 25 or something.
They say that how you came to this late at the age of 30.
I'm 51.
I'm publishing my first book this spring, you know.
Yeah.
I'm amused that you came to this at the end of the 30s.
In my mid-30s.
It's kind of ridiculous.
Which is kind of the perfect time to become a writer, it seems to me.
But prior to that, you were a computer guy.
I was a programmer for a long time.
And this was in Manhattan?
Well, various places.
First in Vermont.
I lived in Vermont for six or seven years.
Then in Boston and then in New York.
So you've been around.
Yeah.
Tell me then where Easy came from.
I mean, I guess you were banging around the computer and I worked for it all of a sudden.
Yeah, right.
I just started typing.
It wasn't Easy then.
Did he appear?
I mean, was he conjured out of the cosmos?
Yeah, yeah.
But pretty much basically I was just writing about him.
And I draw a lot on people I've known, my parents, my family, my friends and stuff.
But, you know, he just kind of came up.
Did you see him?
I mean, do you have a picture?
No, I've never had a picture of him, which is the funny thing about the movie stuff.
People get upset at me.
They go, well, what is he, you know, who's going to be the movie?
And I go, Denzel Washington.
He goes, oh, no, he doesn't look like Easy.
And I go, oh, you know.
What does he look like?
You know, what I do is for Easy.
I have, you know, like I really like talking about people, drawing them, seeing what they look like and stuff.
But easy, you know, he's the kind of guy who doesn't think about what he looks like.
He doesn't, you know, he's just one of those guys.
He comes from a kind of background where that's less important.
It's irrelevant.
Right.
Yeah, it's irrelevant, basically, because life is so hard.
It has been so hard for him.
So, well, you know, so is he handsome.
I don't know if he's handsome.
After I hit him, he's not going to be so handsome.
But the idea, and, you know, and people don't talk to him about what he looks like.
I mean, who, you know, because, you know, that conceit, you know, when,
You know, when people first start to write and they don't quite know what writing's about, and they're writing a first-person thing and say, well, I passed a mirror.
And I looked at myself, finely chiseled features with a broad Roman nose.
That's funny.
So I don't really know what he looks like, but I know what he feels like.
Oh, that's good.
But you really don't have a picture of him.
No.
I know he's over six feet tall.
Can you hear his voice?
Yeah.
Because he does certainly have a voice.
His voice is like, he has a nice tenor voice.
His voice is, and I know who he is.
I know what he feels like, what he talks like.
I know his, like, inner fears and his inner kind of, like, that's what I know about him, you know.
I know that he's not arrogant, but, you know, confident of himself physically, you know, in the world.
Not necessarily that he thinks he's beautiful.
He doesn't really think about that, but he thinks he's strong.
He can fight.
And, of course, he finds often enough that they're wrong enough.
Do you know the Andy Vox character, the guy?
Oh, sure, Burke.
Yeah.
People often wonder if maybe this is an extension of Andrew, you know.
But he certainly is interested in the things he's interested in, and I guess he takes his rage and his concerns to the next step.
Is he an extension of you in that respect?
Not exactly.
For me, Easy is a character who represents a world that I'm very interested in and that I love very much.
I love that world.
Maybe if you could just define it a bit.
Yeah, well, you know, it's kind of the world of my father and his life.
His story, which I felt like I know so well, and I was surprised one day to find that not everybody else in the world knows this story about, you know,
poor, black, rural people from, you know, deep down in Louisiana and Texas who, you know, kind of came up just, I mean, barely.
Survival was an amazing thing growing up.
And then having this amazing series of events happen to him, going off into World War II, fighting, realizing all of a sudden, you know, my father used to tell me, he said, when he went to war, he thought he wasn't worried about it.
He said, because
If the Germans came, he would just throw down his gun and say, I'm sorry, I'm not American, I'm a Negro.
I'm just a nigger.
But he realized, no, they were shooting at me too.
And then after a while he realized that the French and the English liked him.
They were happy because he was coming there to liberate them.
And that he was... Why did Josephine Baker like it so much in Paris?
Yeah, well, you know, that's the whole thing.
Of course, she was at a point where she could decide to go.
My father, it was just like, you know, come on, boy, we're going over to war, you know.
And then, you know, then coming back and then migrating up to the north.
So it's a story that I know.
It's like a story of my people, my family, my relatives, my friends that... Passed on as a royal tradition.
Right.
and you say it's my memory but it's the memory of what is not what you've experienced but what you've been told but you know that's the whole thing about being human memory you know experiencing things and knowing things it's a really blurry line in between those things and they really intermingle a whole lot I think so you started in your 30s and you're working at the word processor and easy appears I mean is it that
organic, or did you really think about this?
I did the thinking, but I did the thinking after I'd come up with the character.
The novels are me thinking through this, and if you look at them, I mean, it really is, you can see very big shifts, and not in who he is, but, you know, how I'm working on articulating his life.
Not just his life, but what you're doing, I guess, with the form.
Right, the whole, you know, the whole thing.
Now, according to a few, and I read the
That was quite a good press kit, by the way.
They really do send a lot of good articles.
But you really do think of yourself as a fiction writer, and it pisses you off a tad to be
to be categorized as a genre writer.
And believe me, I respect that.
I mean, if Bob Parker lives, you know, half a mile from where we sit now, is he writing novels or is he writing, you know, mystery novels?
I mean, P.D.
James is writing absolutely, you know, novels that are taken very seriously as literature.
But just address yourself to that, maybe.
Well, you know, it's interesting.
You know, there are...
I don't mind somebody saying I'm a mystery writer.
I mean, that doesn't bother me all by itself.
It tends to dismiss what you're doing.
Right, but they do it in a way, often people do it in a way, there's a dispense of people who say, you know, I was talking to one, I was sitting with a couple of writers, and one of them said, oh, you don't know Walter, he writes great books.
You know, I read his books, and then all of a sudden he got nervous and went, well, you know, I read them on the beach.
I looked at him and said, well, you can read them in your house.
It's all right.
You can read them in the fall.
It's okay.
But then he reiterated.
I was on vacation.
He had a qualifier.
Right.
And that is what I don't like to take.
To take the thing and say, well, this is vacation literature.
It's not serious.
I think I'm writing some of them.
equally as serious as any other piece of literature coming out today.
Well, listen, I took Elizabeth Bishop's letters on a vacation, which I prefer to read when you have the time to enjoy what you're reading.
When I finally do take my vacation, I'm going to read Langston Hughes, Bell Hooks, and Albert Einstein.
This is where I'm going to read when I go on vacation in August.
I don't understand.
That's what I don't like.
I don't like when people say, well, this isn't literature.
This isn't, you know, this is...
This is your playing now.
When are you going to write something serious?
Admittedly, however, you do have conventions that you have to observe.
Absolutely.
But everybody does.
There are rules of the game, and you have to give the reader a fair shot at figuring it out, and there are things that have to be done.
Agreed.
There are conventions to the genre that I follow, more or less.
I expect, however, at some point,
you're 42, you're going to want to start growing as a writer.
Well, my next book is going to be this thing called R.L.'
's Dream, which is, for lack of a better term, a blues novel.
It's a novel about an old blues singer living in New York who's dying.
And he once, when he was a young man, played with Robert Johnson.
And he's remembering Robert Johnson.
And I like this book a lot.
I think that I have a lot of broader range in the book of
Fictionally, because I'm not using a first-person narrative, but a third person, I'm changing from different characters through the book.
See, you're lucky you have a good publisher that will allow you to do that.
Eventually, at Random House, the contract says every book's got to be about a shark or a squid or something like that.
It's got to be in the ocean.
Well, you know, but you know, you could say, if you said that to Melville, he'd say, okay, I'll write about a whale.
You know, you can do it.
Well, what I'm saying is Random House... Yeah, they want to make their money on it.
He's a property.
He's a property, and you've got a guy like...
Well, Edna B. Cannon was there.
She's the Bulletin Prize-winning crime reporter from the Miami Herald.
When she decided she wanted to do a novel, she's gone.
They cut her loose.
Really?
Yeah, she's in Hyperion.
She's in her last three books with Hyperion.
But wait, who cut her loose?
Random House.
Oh, Random House.
Oh, when she wanted to do the mystery.
Oh, I see.
The paper was loose.
No, no, no, no, no.
I was going, huh?
No, no, no, no.
She left.
No, no, it's a big problem.
But they are allowing you to write a blues novel where, in fact, you know, your celebrity and your following is being established.
A nice house like Martin can do that.
But, you know, like, I mean, I don't, there's a few things.
Number one, listen, if you're with most of the people who do mysteries, that's all they know how to do.
Even if you say you wanted to write a different book.
You may be the only mystery writer on the list.
There's two that they have.
I forgot his name.
I don't know why.
He's a poet.
And he wrote the Saratoga Mystery.
I don't know.
But, yeah, I'm very happy with Norton.
Of course, the money that they're going to put behind me isn't...
These books are sold.
They've made a market for themselves.
So R.L.'
's Dream is going to be a smaller book.
Give me the title once more.
R.L.'
's Dream.
I'm very happy with that.
I'm really happy when I get back to working on it.
This is the first time I haven't been able to work on tour because I'm doing a lot of stuff.
Do you write on a computer?
Yeah, I write on a computer.
Which I have it.
I haven't used it.
Three days I've been able to.
Yes, Dr. Rojo was sitting right there half an hour ago.
He's now writing on a computer, which stuns the hell out of me.
You know, I thought he was all... He's a very progressive fellow that yelled Dr. Rojo.
Yeah.
Anyway, where are we going?
This is irrelevant, but I understand that you have a comic book collection?
Oh, yes.
I just wrote a book about bibliomania.
Yeah.
Madness.
I wish I'd met you a couple of years ago.
So you should have.
I've collected comic books ever since I was 12.
But I don't have a comic book collection in my book.
Tell me about it a bit.
Maybe I'll get it in.
When I was a kid, there's an interesting thing.
Young boys, I think it's girls to a lesser degree, but young boys definitely, when they start going through those hormonal changes,
They're kind of violent changes, and they affect the way boys think.
But, of course, young kids are very intelligent, and they learn very quickly, and they want to learn.
But it's just that they're governed by these forces going on in them.
I look back now, and I understand that.
The comic books really dealt with that kind of stuff for me.
All these things, like you would have characters like the Submariner, who is this guy.
who's half human and half, you know, like this merman kind of stuff.
He's kind of like that, but he's like, he's like a hero villain.
I mean, there's an amphibian in the novel.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
But yeah, I figured.
But for me, when I was a kid, I'd be reading this and I'd love this guy because he's a hero for his people down under the sea, but he's a villain for us up over the land.
And the whole concept of having like ambivalence, like, you know,
be doing things that are bad, but for good reasons, all this other stuff.
The kind of stuff that kids think about all the time, that no other form of literature, I mean, you can read The Scarlet Letter, but it's hard to grab onto it because it doesn't have that kind of dynamic stuff that kids want, like, you know, violence and flying and rays and all this other stuff.
And so when I was a kid, I read them all the time.
It's just religious.
I'd go by my comic book and sit down and read these comic books, which is just... At what point did you get collecting them, though?
Well,
From the beginning, I did.
Are you a collector?
Is it innate in you?
No, no.
I don't collect anything except for I have these comic books.
So you don't have an obsessive quality to you?
Collecting, I buy the comic books and I put them in plastic bags and I keep them.
I do that.
To this day?
Yeah.
Did you read them first?
Some of them.
Some of them, some of them not.
So you're a collector then?
I collect them.
If you buy them and don't read them,
If you buy them to keep them, you're a collector.
Well, but for me, you can't separate it.
Number one, I don't care if they get messed up.
So that kind of removes me from collector.
You know, because some people will buy it.
Condition is important.
So I don't do that.
And I read, but like a lot of, like half the ones I buy, I read.
Some of them, either I'm not interested in them right now, or I'm interested in an ARC or whatever.
But I am a collector.
Do you get any kind of nourishment out of them?
Oh, God, there's a... I think that I'm still kind of... Actually, DC and I have been dickering around about writing a graphic novel for their comic book, The Vision, which I'm probably going to do next year when I have some comics.
But I read this comic book the other day.
I wrote an article for it for the Village Boys, where there's the Hulk.
You know, he's one of the big comic book characters.
The Hulk has had two different partners, an old partner, Jim, and a new partner, Rick.
Actually, Rick is really old, but he came back in.
Jim, they find out a black kid is in a halfway house for people with AIDS.
You know, like a support house.
And he has AIDS.
And the help comes down, he's supposed to do this thing, and there's this super villain.
It's very complex, but it works out where they address every major issue about AIDS.
Having AIDS, taking care of people with AIDS, protecting people with AIDS because people hate them irrationally.
blood, transferring blood, they got that in there.
And at the very end, the Hulk and Rick are having this conversation.
And Rick says, well, how do you think that Jim got AIDS?
And Hulk looks at him and goes, well, it doesn't matter how he got AIDS.
What matters is he's our friend and he's sick and we have to help him.
And, you know, I read this comment and I said, you know, this is like really good because, you know, this is how you can talk to a 12-year-old about AIDS.
You can't make an adult comic book and say, oh, John almost did drugs or almost had sex.
You just can't do it.
You have to address it in a way that kids are interested for another reason, for reading.
But to engage them first as entertainment, I guess.
Which is the same thing, I think, about my own work.
I was just about to seg you into that.
My own work is the same kind of thing.
I think that, you know, along with E.M.
Forrester, that the most important thing about a novel is the story.
The story is, well, what happens next?
Turning the page.
And being committed to the world that you're writing about, loving it, really wanting to write about it, but also remembering that if you want other people to read it, it has to be a story.
It has to be interesting.
It has to be something about it that engages the reader.
Don't mean a thing if it ain't got this way.
That's right.
Absolutely.
I know.
I really believe that, and I believe in all kinds of art forms.
It's easy to start to become snooty about art.
But art isn't a snooty thing.
Art is entertainment.
Art is fun.
Art is satisfying.
It drives violence.
Human expression is what it is.
It's all the basic stuff.
But you did, before I interrupted, you did say, I am a collector.
And I just wonder if you could finish that.
Well, no, I collect this.
I mean, I don't even know what to say because a collector.
What's the purpose of the collection?
Like it's 6,000.
Well, you know, I started.
You see, one of the things is I started doing it.
And, like, I really kind of keep feeling that if I just stopped, then one day I'd be sad about it.
If I just stopped, one day I would be sad.
I would miss something about it, you know.
And so I just keep doing it.
Do you buy old and rare comic books?
No, not really.
It's too much money.
Not really.
It's like being just a little pregnant.
No.
Well, no, I don't.
Let me say it like this.
When I say not really, every once I think about it, like last night I was on television, Sotheby's is auctioning off the old comics.
Big money.
Batman 1 and Superman 1 go for $25,000 to $30,000.
It wouldn't be a bad investment.
I thought about it for about...
10 seconds and i thought it's not 10 seconds it's a lot of thought it's not worth it it's not worth it superman number one because because seven thousand because the condition because the condition doesn't matter to me because the condition of superman number one as a thing is not worth sixty seven thousand dollars or it's not worth it's not i wouldn't i wouldn't spend a thousand dollars
Well, I mean, Wayne Gretzky paid a half a million dollars for a baseball card.
I don't get it.
I don't get it either.
That's ridiculous.
I mean, if you really love it.
These are, by definition, ephemeral items.
This is ephemera.
Yeah, it's not like the Mona Lisa.
You know, it's not like Modigliani.
I could see buying a painting.
And I have bought paintings that I like.
And, you know, because of one piece of work, you know, it's like done.
It's really, it really means something all by itself, singularly in the world.
I can see collecting that on some kind of high level.
But, you know, comic books are, like you say, ephemera.
You have goals for yourself, I guess.
It would please you when all is said and done to be ranked and considered with the crates of the genre.
Oh, yeah.
Talk to me about that.
Well, you know, I'm in there.
Do you read them, by the way?
I've read all of them.
I've read all the greats.
I mean, I haven't read some of the people.
But, you know, there are a lot of people who are just wonderful.
The guys in America, Chandler Hammett, McDonald, later Charles Williford, who I just think is brilliant.
He is excellent.
I'm sorry he died.
He's such a great writer.
Isn't he a little cockfighter?
Jeff Wilford?
Was he down in Florida?
Yeah.
I haven't read that.
I reviewed that when I first started reviewing.
It wasn't a mystery.
It was just a novel.
Wonderful, about cockfighting.
Spectacular.
His writing is so good.
It's just like, you know, I just, I just, it's just, you read it and it's just funny.
It's like, and you know, with anybody who can make you laugh, Sam doesn't simply choose Parker.
He has a great ability to make you laugh.
Tim and James Lee Burke, you know, you can say anything you want about genre.
I mean, uh,
This guy's a novelist who can't write about any damn thing he wants.
No, it's true.
And I'm sure I'm being introduced to you now.
I have to confess, you know, I write about authors all the time.
I can't say I've read the shelf on Mosley.
That's right.
But once I get into a person and I like them, then I inevitably do.
All right, like I read all of Rick Stout and all of someone else.
It took me years, you know.
But how do you see yourself developing as a writer?
How do you mean that?
Developing as a, you know, maturing, developing, changing.
I don't know.
Otherwise it becomes stale.
Yeah, well, it can't be the same stuff.
You know, part of the thing that I have for this series is I don't, I age easily, and each book is, you know,
somewhat older, though I'm going to spend a while in the 60s.
I'm going to start it from the age of 28.
I'm going to go up to the age of 75, 76, whatever.
So that's one way that... So he will age with you?
Yeah.
In real time or three quarters?
In real time.
A lot less.
I think I'll probably be finished with the series in 10 to 12 years.
Oh, so at that point you will have, you will be developing into... I'll be like, I'll be 50-something.
Yeah, but I mean, you'll be writing other things.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
I'll be writing other stuff.
You know, I'll be
There's a lot of stuff I want to do.
As a writer itself, I'm so interested in it because one thing that I love about doing work that you love, that you grow by doing the work.
If you really are interested in the work and you're interested in how it's going to develop and where it's going to go, you just grow and the work changes and grows.
So where I'll end up, I don't know.
Who I'll be, I don't know.
I expect to have some footing in the genre, whatever that is.
But I also expect to go into many other aspects of writing.
This thing of writing about the blues is another aspect of black life.
I think that the blues is the 20th century idea of tragedy.
And so I'm talking about that in this book.
In other books, I'll be doing other stuff like that.
Is this a longer novel, say, than the blues novel?
It's very hard to tell.
This book is 80,000 words.
The blues novel won't be more than 100,000.
It might be less than 8,000.
Writing long books...
There has to be a good reason for it.
There used to be a good reason for it.
My book is 255,000 books.
My God.
Well, it's nonfiction.
What can I tell you?
Oh, yeah.
I covered 2,500 years.
How can you not write that?
No, but that's the point, though.
I mean, I think that, like, when people were writing novels at the beginning of the century and into the last century, they had a lot of work to do.
They had to talk about, you know,
places that people had never been, people that they had never met, thoughts that they had never had.
And there were no competing distractions either for the reader's time.
Sure, well, there's that.
But also those distractions also fill in that thing.
Like, you know, if you want to know about the Himalayas, probably if that's a reason that you're going to read something, you might do just as well to look at a National Geographic special on the Himalayas.
But if you're writing about a character in the Hamalayas, really you're talking about the character themselves and how they're developing, how they relate.
And that's shorter work.
It's more condensation.
See, why is it that I can't read James Michener with pleasure?
Because for precisely that reason.
If I want to go to Hawaii, Hawaii, go there.
Or know the history of Hawaii.
It's interesting.
I respect him.
tremendously, but he doesn't engage me as a writer of fiction.
I like The Godfather, a big old rambly book, and I like going through all that stuff because the history is more personal history.
It's not the kind of history you're going to go read somewhere.
It's not the history of Sicily, but it's the history of a family, a mafia family from Sicily to New York.
I could slow down for something like that.
Yeah, I've been told many times.
Really?
And everybody tells me that you're distributed everywhere.
No kidding.
I'm doing it myself.
Entrepreneurially, if there's such a word.
But I got myself a... What are the vital signs for you?
What do you hear from readers?
And does it influence what you're doing?
Well, you know...
That's interesting.
I hear a lot from readers.
Mainly, I don't... And then as a corollary, pardon me, but do you have a picture of who your reader is?
No.
I mean, I do, but it's a very broad readership.
It's in three distinct categories, I think.
There are the mystery readers, which is a very broad range of people, from bricklayers to physicists.
The other day, somebody was like, I've got a book, and I was signing a book for this long-haired guy, and somebody said,
This guy was one of the foremost geneticists, like in the country.
But, like, I didn't know this guy on a bicycle.
But, like, I'm signing his book, you know, and he's reading it.
You know, and then, you know, just all kinds of other people.
That's in the mystery world.
Then there's a world of black people, the African-Americans, who, you know, are kind of hungry to hear or to be corroborated in their knowledge of that oral history that we were talking about, who come and, you know, just talk about it and say, yeah, I had...
parents like that or i'm like that or i'm interested in that that kind of people and then the kind of a general literary audience i i have you know i've been developing uh over this period of time people who read it on the beach and then they take it back to their house and read it you know you had a terrific paperback sale of course which uh which cuts across all yeah right yeah that that you know that's the whole thing that paperback is doing very well and
So, you know, that's going really good.
And, you know, but, you know, also, you know, interestingly, just something else, at the ABA.
Did you go to the ABA?
Yeah, I was there.
I was there a lot.
But one of the things, on June 5th, on the Sunday, I had a little article in the book review.
It was page two.
It was an article about racism and publishing.
The TVR or the LA Times?
LA Times.
it was about racism and publishing.
Because, you know, you have the publishing world, but there are no people of color in it.
A few black people, and then nobody else.
Like, no Puerto Ricans, no, you know, Native Americans.
Very few Asians, which is kind of surprising to me.
But all these people, they're just not there.
And I did write an article about it.
It just said, you know, it's an aspect of liberal passive racism.
And I think it was a good article.
Because I don't think I said anything that was untrue.
or anything anybody could call a liar could argue with, which I think is the big thing about journalism when you do it.
Because if anybody can negate one moment of it, then they can negate everything that you said.
And so I was very happy with the writing.
And I don't really see it much different than any other kind of writing I do.
And it was wonderful because maybe 40 or 50 people came up to me and said thanks.
Isn't that great?
He just said, thanks for writing that, because we want to see the truth out there.
It is the payoff of journalism, by the way.
It is immediate.
The response is, a buddy of mine who's a writer and also a former jazz musician, he said, the thing about performing on the stage is that you hear it immediately.
If they've enjoyed what you've done, the applause is there.
But when you're writing, it can be two or three years before
There's any kind of a sense.
Or if you live that long.
Herman Melville, one of the people.
Exactly.
Okay.
Well, I think we've got a pretty good little interview here.
All right.
If you give me an address, I'll be pleased to send you some copies.
37 Carmine Street.
C-A-R-M-I-N-E?
Yeah.
10014.
Okay, good.